---
layout: post
date: 2017-09-12
Author: Holly Suttle  
Primary SEO:  
Secondary SEO:
title: "What are the predictions for PR19?"    
---
With so many water companies competing in today’s market, it is hard to know which companies are predicted to be the high fliers of the near future. However, an analysis by Macquarie reveals that it is the listed companies that are going above and beyond to outperform privately-held companies, ranking Severn Trent and South West Water as the best future performers out of a total of 17 different companies.  

Macquarie’s analysis uses the Return on Regulated Equities (RoRE) model as well as the company’s finances within the principles of PR19 to estimate whether the companies will be able to uphold or cut their dividends. Their analysis predicted that Severn Trent and South West Water will be able to continue to uphold their dividends, whereas the analysis predicted that United Utilities, the third listed company in the sector, will be forced to cut 10 percent of its dividend.  

On the 1st September 2017, the published document stated that, “Publicly listed companies perform very strongly relative to the industry as a whole. South West Water (Pennon) and Severn Trent are the top two performers and United Utilities is not far behind. Is there something in this?” They believe that the significance of publicly listed water companies being in the upper half of the 17 water companies - with two grabbing gold and silver place - could potentially be “down to corporate governance”, as standards have been identified as higher within publicly listed companies as opposed to their privately listed rival companies. With governance being recognised as a huge factor in this analysis, Macquarie believes that this will give the Water Services Regulation Authority, also known as Ofwat or Ofgem, range for further examination to induce companies to perform better in regards to PR19. Macquarie vocalises that they “see a philosophical change in Ofwat going forward: that baseline RoREs are no longer going to be the main driver for achieved returns, and just turning up will no longer be good enough. We believe we will see increasingly divergent achieved returns between companies driven by relative performance (innovation led) and difference in cost of financing.”  

Macquarie also state that the future WAC based on RPI could drop 38 percent in relation to the current price review, predicting a simple WAC of 2.3 percent real. Their prediction uses the average base RoRE from Ofwat’s published percentage of 3.8-4.5, therefore using 4.2 percent as a base RoRE. However, Maquarie still infer that some of the top water companies in the running could even succeed in doubling that figure, stating that the market’s focus on baseline allowed returns could mean that with the added totex, ODI and financing outperformance, the total RoRE could increase to a significant sum. Despite Ofwat’s discussions on their upcoming method for PR19 ending earlier this year on August 30th, the regulator has since dealt with 60 different responses that are going to be published next to the decided PR19 methodology once it has been finalised at the end of this year, December 2017. Some eyebrows were raised, however, by the Consumer Council for Water when it was suggested that ODIs should also be increased. Many water companies have made known their concerns on the matter, including one of the current top performers, Severn Trent.
