---layout: defaultpermalink: /blog/guidelinesfluidity: boxed---# Editorial Guidelines for the Tilix BlogA number of things to consider with regards to these critical questions:1. **Writing** — is the post engaging & compelling?2. **Scanability** — is the post easy to scan read?3. **Search engine optimisation (SEO)** — will Google like the post?4. **Grammar** — does the post include errors that reduce credibility?5. **On Target** - does the post meet it's objectives?6. **Alignment** - how much does this post contribute to the goals for the blog as a whole?## AlignmentTo see how well a draft post aligns with the whole blog, score it for each of the points below. Options are 0,1,2 or 3.1. **What is the objective of this blog? Why are you maintaining it? What do you hope to gain?**It is to create B2B leads for Tilix. The blog is a core pillar of _authority marketing_ for Tilix.2. **What is your core area of expertise?**Innovation & Technology in energy.3. **Why would readers want to read your posts and not get their information elsewhere?**Tilix works at the cutting edge of the transformation of energy from _carbon to silicon_. Tilix publish ideas, opinions, analysis and recipes that are thought leading.4. **Describe your brand.**(Maybe try to assign a personality to it. E.g. Is it a James Bond or an Austin Powers? A Dr Phil or an Oprah? A night-clubber or an opera-goer?) Who is your typical reader? (E.g., brain surgeon, male, 30-45, professional, affluent, physically active)6. **What is that reader’s current opinion of your blog?**  Based on feedback from LinkedIn posts, Tilix content is well received by fellow professionals. However, laypeople think it is boring, pompous and arrogant.7. **Do you know of any barriers to subscription/loyalty/ trust?**  The reader might decide NOT to trust Tilix if the quality of blogging is poor. Readers may be indifferent to the calls to action - we won't know until we try!8. **Why should readers trust you?**Expertise in the energy domain and in technology solutions must shine through. Content must be valuable to the audience. That means is timely, technically accurate and addresses real world challenges.9. **What style are you aiming for in your posts?**  Posts will have cutting edge content but the tone of voice will be informative. Language will be as simple as possible but we must avoid being simplistic.10. **What will your readers NOT want to see in your posts?** Too much technobabble in business posts and hot-air in tech posts. There should be no criticism of competitors. Personal asides should only be used to colour in business and technical concepts.## On TargetThe _front matter_ of every post should include answers to the following questions. A reviewer can score a draft 0,1,2 or 3 on each point.1. What do you want to get out of this post?2. What will your readers want to get out of this post?3. What problem/need/situation/interest has led them to read this post?4. Why would readers want to read this post rather than get their information elsewhere?5. What points/claims do you want to make in this post?6. Can you validate these points/claims? If so, how?7. What style are you aiming for in this post?8. What will your readers NOT want to see in this post?9. What is the call to action for this post? i.e. What do you want the reader to do after reading it?   Comment|Click|Email|Subscription)10. What is your primary keyword/phrase for SEO?11. What is your secondary keyword/phrase for SEO?## Writing ($61 possible) For each of the questions below **yes** scores the $ amount and **no** scores no points.1. Is your intro easy to read? ($3 see p.22) 2. Have you written as much as you need to and no more? ($3 see p.22) 3. Use "you", not "the reader" ($3 see p.22) 4. Write effective headings ($3 see p.23) 5. Tell a story ($3 see p.23) 6. Answer the questions your reader will probably ask ($3 see p.24) 7. Provide a call to action ($3 see p.24) 8. Show you understand the reader's situation ($3 see p.24) 9. Show some personality ($3 see p.25) 10. Be open and honest ($3 see p.25) 11. Use contractions ($3 see p.26) 12. Use short sentences for impact ($3 see p.26) 13. Promise an outcome ($2 see p.27) 14. Ask "Yes" questions ($2 see p.27) 15. Use active language ($2 see p.27) 16. Provide closure ($2 see p.28) 17. Be positive ($2 see p.28)18. Link with active language ($2 see p.29) 19. Be rhythmic, but not repetitive ($2 see p.29) 20. Use emotive language ($2 see p.29) 21. Use contrast ($2 see p.30) 22. Use repetition ($2 see p.30) 23. Signal your professionalism ($2 see p.30) 24. Use metaphors ($1 see p.32)25. Use incomplete sentences for emphasis ($1 see p.32)26. Issue a challenge ($1 see p.33) ## Scanability ($13)For each of the questions below **yes** scores the $ amount and **no** scores no points. 1. Lead with the important stuff ($3 see p.33)2. Segment with sub-headings ($3 see p.34)3. Front-load your headings ($2 see p.34)4. Use lists instead of long sentences ($2 see p.34) 5. Signal when the reader can stop reading ($2 see p.35)6. Bold the important bits ($1 see p.35) ## SEO ($24)For each of the questions below **yes** scores the $ amount and **no** scores no points.1. Cluster your pages around your keywords ($3 see p.36)2. Use keywords in post title & headings ($3 see p.36)3. Target a max of two key-phrases ($3 see p.36) 4. Link to related posts & pages ($3 see p.37)5. Use keywords in links ($3 see p.37)6. Forget keyword density ($3 see p.38)7. Check keyword frequency with a word cloud ($2 see p.38)8. Use keywords at the start of post title & headings ($2 see p.39)9. Bold your keywords & related words ($1 see p.40)10. Use keywords & related words in lists ($1 see p.40)## Grammar (-$43)Take the $ amount away if the post has any of the following weaknesses.1. Use the wrong version of English (US / British) (-$2 see p.31)2. "You" instead of "you're" (-$3 see p.41)3. Incorrect use of "their", "there" or "they're" (-$3 see p.41)4. "To" instead of "too" (-$3 see p.41)5. "It's" instead of "its" (-$3 see p.42)6. "Then" instead of "than" (-$3 see p.42)7. Incorrect use of "effect" or "affect" (-$3 see p.42) 8. Incorrect use of "me" or "I" (-$3 see p.42) 9. Incorrect use of "advice" or "advise" (-$3 see p.43) 10. Incorrect use of "compliments" or "complements" (-$2 see p.43)11. Incorrect use of "practice" or "practise" (-$3 see p.43) 12. Incorrect use of "licence" or "license" (-$3 see p.43)13. "Lay" instead of "lie" (-$3 see p.44)14. Incorrect use of "all right" or "alright" (-$3 see p.44)15. "ACME Inc are" instead of "ACME Inc is" (-$1 see p.44)16. "That" instead of "who" (-$1 see p.44) 17. "Different to" or "different than" instead of "different from" (-$1 see p.45)18. "Bored of" instead of "bored with" (-$1 see p.45)19. Ambiguous positioning of "only" (-$1 see p.45) 20. Over-use of "that" (-$1 see p.45)21. Incorrect use of "that" or "which" (-$1 see p.46) 