---
layout: post
title: "Why I Drive an EV & other electric car answers"
date: 2017-01-16
Author: Neil Williams  
Primary SEO:  
Secondary SEO:    
---
In 2014 my family and I decided we should get an electric car (aka Electric Vehicle or EV). 
We choose the Nissan Leaf and now we have more than 30,000 miles of zero emission driving on the clock. 

We have a few stories to tell and have answered a variety of questions from lots of different people. This post includes answers to some of the frequently asked questions. 

## Why do you drive an electric car?
I am deeply concerned about sustainability and believe that driving an EV is a good way to deal with a host of problems e.g. air quality, the fossil fuel end game and climate change.

However, the key motivation is related to my work as an energy industry technologist and innovator. I think it is inevitable that EVs will disrupt our relationship with electricity and oil. Getting my hands on an EV has given me a real understanding of the current state of the art and the road ahead.

Another critical motivation is that I hope my past experience will give me access to entrepreneurial opportunities within the EV market. For example:

* I have helped start-ups develop vision and multimedia systems for automotive.
* My apprenticeship was with a firm that developed display systems for military vehicles.
* My PhD research was related to autonomous submersibles. 
* I led the software engineering on [Volkswagen's Multimedia Concept Car][1]. 

This became reality much quicker than I expected. Early in 2016, I joined Uniti Sweden as a business angel and we have started out strongly on delivering an ingenious EV vision. The Uniti tribe is growing at a healthy rate and raised over €1M of pledges from a crowd funding campaign.
 
## What is the best part of owning an electric car?
The practicality of charging at home is neat. However, being "down with the kids" makes me smile. I am really proud that Erik (9) and Emma (7) frequently let the world know that "Dad's car does not fart".

## What’s impressed you most about the EV?
I am a canny Scotsman, so it is no surprise that I am super impressed with a baseline cost of 2p per mile :-) See below for more answers on cost.

## Is the EV your primary vehicle?
Yes, the Leaf is our primary car. With two kids and living in a rural village we do have two cars. The second is a Skoda Octavia. Christina was a bit freaked by the electric car at first but now she'll take the Leaf when ever it is available.

## Is it a good family car?
Absolutely! We've taken three family holiday trips to Scotland. The stops for charging seem to fit naturally with the breaks needed by the family so this has not been a showstopper.

We also enjoy day trips. Building routes around charging points means that we've stopped at quite a few new places. With a petrol or diesel we may not have been drawn into some lovely towns like, for example, Corsham, Melksham, Trowbridge or Droitwich Spa

## How have people reacted to your decision to drive electric?
I've found that driving an EV has been a very good topic of conversation for the following reasons:

1. Most folks understand that EVs have challenges and many want to find out more about the practicalities. These conversations give me good insights into the _early majority_ mindset.
2. Some like to make jokes at my expense. I take the banter in good humour and use these exchanges to learn about the _laggard_ mindset.
3. Occasionally I get my brain picked by people who are serious about purchasing an EV. I love to help here and increase the number of _early adopters_.

## How far can you go on a single charge?
The range of our Nissan Leaf and other EVs depends on several factors:

* __How you drive.__ Hyper miling is good. Don't be in a hurry. Accelerate gently, anticipate stops and speed reduction to avoid using brakes. 
* __The road conditions.__ Cruising is the ideal condition. City traffic with stop and go reduces range. Uphill stretches require more energy.
* __Weather.__ Cold and damp is a triple whammy. First, you will use the heater, second the battery performance is badly affected and third the mechanical efficiency is reduced.

The marketing people at Nissan UK say that the maximum range is 127 miles on [NEDC type tests][NEDC]. In the USA, the answer is that the average range is 84 miles based on [EPA testing][EPA]. So in Europe the marketing folks can talk about the best results achieved in standard tests. In the USA, the tests cover a range of conditions and the average is quoted in sales literature.

With 30,000+ miles on the clock our experience is that for a 2k kWH Leaf, 1 mile per percentage of charge is the absolute maximum. On that basis I could just about squeeze a 100 mile journey out of a single charge. In practice, I say that 80 miles is the upper limit for a long journey. I have done 80 miles a couple of times but I prefer not to push my luck!

Journeys above 80 miles typically involve motorway driving. For these road conditions I have found that 50 miles is a typical range. Given the distances between service stations and that most are on Ecotricity's Electric Highway, then it is possible to go long distances. However, the journey time will be extended due to the charging stops and has to be factored into journey time.

## What is the longest trip you have ever taken?
Bristol to Edinburgh (416 miles via A1) and Edinburgh to London (398 miles via A1). Both of these were with a full load of wife, 2 kids and luggage. These were vacation trips, so the stops to charge and the overnight stays in hotels and with friends were fun. For long distance business trips, I prefer to drive to a rail station and take the train.

## Are there any ways to extend your range?
The Nissan Leaf is 100% battery powered. Unlike with _hybrid_ or _range extended_ vehicles it cannot use onboard fossil fuel to boost range. I think it should be possible to "pimp my ride" by temporarily adding more battery packs (either in the storage space or in a trailer). However, I haven't looked into this and have no idea of the practicality & cost.

So for us the only way to extend range is to [drive efficiently][Hypermiler]. Simple techniques can double effective range. The worst I have performed is 3 miles per kWh and the best is 5.6 miles per kWh. My average is 4 miles per kWh. Our car has a 24 kWh battery, so the absolute maximum range in perfect conditions could be 134 miles.

The Leaf offers a handful of features to help drive sensibly. 

- The dashboard contains lots of live information about power usage that is easy to digest. 
- The "eco mode" dampens the acceleration. In other words the car is artificially made a little bit sluggish. I have this mode on by default and switch it off when I need a "turbo boost".
- Regenerative braking on the Leaf has two modes which I think of as being passive or aggressive. It is effectively how hard the car brakes during coasting with your foot off the accelerator.

My golden rule is __avoid motorways__. They can add 15-20% extra distance onto a journey and push up the average speed. I prefer the "eco route" and maintaining an efficient speed of 45 mph. Avoid braking and understand that [regenerative braking][4] recovers only a fraction.

Reducing the number of people or the amount of cargo, tools, and equipment carried can extend range. However, possibly not by as much as you might think. The kerb weight of the Nissan Leaf is 1500kg & I am a healthy 110kg. Adding a wife, two kids plus luggage increases the total mass by not much more than 10% and the range by quite a bit less than 5%.

__Do not resort to unlawful and dangerous techniques such as tailgating larger vehicles__.

## Have you ever come close to, or run out of charge?
We've had a few close calls, several bouts of [range anxiety][5] and the Leaf has reverted the tortoise lamp has come on a couple of times. However, with 30,000+ miles and some long journeys under our belt we are now pretty in tune with the limits of the vehicle and the charging infrastructure. The biggest pain is when charging points are out of service. This leads to either a leg of the journey with range anxiety and/or a detour that increases journey time.

Our most expensive hiccup was on our first family trip. More on that in an upcoming post where I share some of our EV stories.

[Driving it to the Bitter End][6] is a very good post chronicling a long range drive (132 miles) in a Leaf and the countdown to the poor car giving up the ghost.

## How do you charge it?
Most of our charging has been at home. Initially we had a special unit installed in the garage. This was 7kW (32A) and would give a full charge in 3.5 hours. 

However, we moved house last year and have not arranged for our special unit to be reinstalled. Therefore, we are plugging into standard sockets and using the trickle charger. This is 3 kW (13A) and requires 8 hours for a full charge. 

On the road our most used charging points are with Ecotricity's Electric Highway. There units are industrial strength and can give an 80% charge in 30 minutes.

Public car parks, hotels, supermarkets and businesses have a mixture of 3 kW, 7kW and units.

I plan to write a series of in depth posts about charging including technology, commercial considerations and public perception. Watch this space!

## How do you find charging stations on the go?
The sat nav built into the Nissan Leaf has details of charging points. However, this is often out of date and nor particularly user friendly.

My favourite source of information is [Zap Map][7]. They have a a very useful website and lovely apps for iOS and Android devices.
 
## How do you plan your drive?
Searching for info online is useful, but speaking to people on the ground is priceless. It's better to ask twice than to have range anxiety once!

## Is the maintenance for an electric car different?
Absolutely?? I am guessing as I leave maintenance to the professionals :-) However, I do know that the components are mechanically simple and reliable. For example, there's no radiator, carburettor, spark plugs, distributor etc. Also, an energy efficient driving style prolongs the life of tyres and brakes.

## Does the battery lose charge if you don't use it?
Yes, but in practical terms this is not a major concern. We have had several holidays abroad and left our Leaf parked for 2-3 weeks with airport parking. There was no noticeable loss of charge.

For storage of a month or more, then planning ahead is recommended. In these situations the batteries can become unbalanced and significantly reduce range. This problem is temporary and can be alleviated simply by fully charging the batteries before driving the car. Also fully charge the next few times after a storage event before reverting back to your normal cycle.

Some models have a “storage mode” and others can be managed remotely with a smartphone app.
 
## Is your car fast?
When I have a need for speed, I have found that the Nissan Leaf is comfortable in the fast lane but range does suffer. The top speed is just under 100 mph and it can do 0-60 mph in about 10 secs.

I really like the acceleration from a standing start. Particularly in the initial phase from touching the accelerator to achieving 30 mph. This is where you feel the smooth glide produced by instant torque and no transmission gearing. For my wife and other this is possibly the best thing about electric cars. Check out the first minute or so of [this video][3]. "People used to buy electric cars to help save the planet. Now they buy electric cars, because they are the best, most fun, and coolest rides around."

## What is your cost of ownership?
My bullish promotion of the 2p per mile running cost is marketing spin. This is definitely possible but it is the absolute minimum and some practicalities stop me from achieving it on an ongoing basis. 

Based on a regular weekly commute, I currently have the following estimates:

>Get numbers from ChargePoint Genie. Average over a few weeks. Allow a small percentage for nipping around Warwick. Double up on the Fosse Way journey and add the Ecotricity home charging costs.

The initial costs of EVs are still relatively high. Our Leaf is top of the range so has quite a few luxury extras (e.g leather seats, alloy wheels). The business lease cost is £300 pcm for 10,000 miles per year. Additional miles cost 9p per mile.

## Will you ever go back to fossil fuel?
__I'll never buy another fossil fuel driven car__ I will soon be putting this to the test. 

* Our 2nd car a 2003 Skoda Octavia diesel with 150,000 miles on the clock. It is nearing end of life.
* Our Nissan Leaf has only a few months left on the lease term.

The options we'll need to consider soon are:

1. Dropping the 2nd car
2. Downsizing on the 2nd car with a Mahindra or Smart electric.
3. Buying our Leaf from the lease company or getting a new model on lease.

## Where can I find out more?
TED has some great videos from Amory Lovins & Elon Musk.  [The Revenge of the Electric Car](https://youtu.be/ru89x1jmpq4) is an excellent feature-length documentary. I've enjoyed watching this repeatedly. Despite being shot almost 10 years ago, it still feels current.

For up to date written content in online magazine format please visit Next Green Car. For high quality TV show format, watch [Fully Charged] (https://www.youtube.com/user/fullychargedshow).

[1]: [http://www.engineeringnews.co.za/print-version/multimedia-car-2001-11-16]
[3]: https://youtu.be/N2tYC8PlbVc
[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regenerative_brake
[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Range_anxiety
[6]: https://www.edmunds.com/nissan/leaf/2011/long-term-road-test/2011-nissan-leaf-driving-it-to-the-bitter-end.html
[7]: https://www.zap-map.com
[Electric Car Questions | Nissan LEAF® Q&A]: https://www.nissanusa.com/electric-cars/leaf/owner-questions/
[Electric car FAQs]: https://www.yahoo.com/news/electric-car-faqs-180000308.html
[Six Burning Questions About Electric Cars - Consumer Reports News]: http://www.consumerreports.org/cro/news/2014/07/six-burning-questions-about-electric-cars/index.htm
[NEDC]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_European_Driving_Cycle
[EPA]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FTP-75
[Hypermiler]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy-efficient_driving
[Grant Thomas]: http://mynissanleaf.wordpress.com/
